Add `Cross-Platform Cryptography` document (#1471)
microsoft/go: eng/doc/CrossPlatformCryptography.md

# Cross-Platform Cryptography in Microsoft Go

> Cryptographic operations in Microsoft Go are done by operating system (OS) libraries. This dependency has advantages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cryptographic operations in Microsoft Go are delegated to the operating system (OS) libraries. This dependency has advantages:
```

> Cryptographic operations in Microsoft Go are delegated to the operating system (OS) libraries. This dependency has advantages:

Reviewer 2: Not sure about the blanket statement here... the section goes on to clarify, but it could come off as contradiction (or just wrong, if the reader skips ahead).

```suggestion
Cryptographic operations in Microsoft Go are delegated to the operating system (OS) libraries in some conditions. This dependency has advantages:
```

> * Go apps benefit from OS reliability. Keeping cryptography libraries safe from vulnerabilities is a high priority for OS vendors. To do that, they provide updates that system administrators should be applying.

Reviewer 2: Some people will read between the lines and see this as implying "OS reliability vs. vuln > Go crypto reliability vs. vuln", which AFAIK we don't intend.

I think the point is that an otherwise-unpatched Go app might be safe vs. some very specific crypto vulnerabilities. A lot of Go folks use containers and tend to be used to rebuilding/republishing every time there's *any* vuln, and system administrators wouldn't meddle with live containers, so I don't think this is even considered a benefit for how they currently deploy. IMO this needs to be laid out more clearly, especially pointing out the group (/deployment strategy) who actually gets an advantage from this approach.

Author: Hmm, good point. I'll remove the advantages bullets and the subsequent NOTE altogether. It is confusing and of of scope for this documents.

* Go apps have access to FIPS-validated algorithms if the OS libraries are FIPS-validated.

> [!NOTE]
> Starting with Go 1.24, Go will also be FIPS 140-3 compliant, see https://github.com/golang/go/issues/69536.

> > If the only reason you are using Microsoft Go is for FIPS 140-3 compliance, you should consider using Microsoft Go 1.24 or later.

Reviewer 2: This note seems a bit odd... if you are looking for FIPS 140-3 compliance, my intuition would be that you *must* use 1.24 or later?

My brain's autocorrect points me in another direction being the actual intent--to consider using upstream:

> If the only reason you are using Microsoft Go is for FIPS 140-3 compliance (not e.g. to conform to Microsoft policy), consider using upstream Go 1.24 or later.

Maybe there's just some missing context to connect how Microsoft Go, upstream Go, and "spec"-like Go 1.24 all relate to FIPS 140-3.

Author: Good catch, the last sentence should mention upstream Go, no Microsoft Go 😅. Will fix + add some clarification.

> Go apps will fall back to native Go implementations if the OS libraries doesn't support the algorithm.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Go apps will fall back to native Go implementations if the OS libraries don't support the algorithm.
```

This article identifies the features that are supported on each platform.

This article assumes you have a working familiarity with cryptography in Go.

## Platform support

Microsoft Go supports the following platforms:

### Windows

> On Windows, Microsoft Go uses the [Cryptography API: Next Generation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/seccng/cng-portal) library, CNG from now on, for cryptographic operations.

Reviewer 2: Simplify term introduction:

```suggestion
On Windows, Microsoft Go uses the [CNG library (Cryptography API: Next Generation)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/seccng/cng-portal) for cryptographic operations.
```

CNG is available since Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008 and it doesn't require any additional installation nor configuration.

### Linux

> On Linux, Microsoft Go uses the [OpenSSL crypto library](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/) library, OpenSSL from now on, for cryptographic operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Linux, Microsoft Go uses the [OpenSSL crypto library](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/), OpenSSL from now on, for cryptographic operations.
```

> On Linux, Microsoft Go uses the [OpenSSL crypto library](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/), OpenSSL from now on, for cryptographic operations.

Reviewer 2: Simplify term introduction:

```suggestion
On Linux, Microsoft Go uses the [OpenSSL crypto library](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/) for cryptographic operations.
```

OpenSSL is normally available on Linux distributions, but it may not be installed by default.
If it is not installed, you can install it using the package manager of your distribution.

OpenSSL 3 implements all the cryptographic algorithms using [Providers](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/#providers).

> Microsoft Go officially supports the built-in providers and the [SymCrypt provider](https://github.com/microsoft/SymCrypt-OpenSSL), SCOSSL from now on.

Reviewer 2: Simplify term introduction:

```suggestion
Microsoft Go officially supports the built-in providers and [SCOSSL (SymCrypt provider for OpenSSL)](https://github.com/microsoft/SymCrypt-OpenSSL).
```

The minimum SCOSSL version required is v1.6.1.

> The following tables assume that the SCOSSL provider is used together with the built-in providers.

Reviewer 2: This might be worth a little more explanation, and/or maybe more straightforward language than "used together with", maybe the built in providers are "also enabled" or something?

Author: Done.

| SHA-2-224                 | ❌                 | ✔️                 |
| SHA-2-256                 | ✔️                 | ✔️                 |
| SHA-2-384                 | ✔️                 | ✔️                 |
| SHA-2-512                 | ✔️                 | ✔️                 |
| SHA-2-512_224             | ❌                 | ✔️<sup>1, 2</sup>  |
| SHA-2-512_256             | ❌                 | ✔️<sup>1, 2</sup>  |
| SHA-3-224                 | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| SHA-3-256                 | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| SHA-3-384                 | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| SHA-3-512                 | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| SHAKE-128                 | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| SHAKE-256                 | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| CSHAKE-128                | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| CSHAKE-256                | ❌                 | ❌                 |
| HMAC<sup>3</sup>          | ✔️                 | ✔️                 |

<sup>1</sup>Available starting in Microsoft Go 1.24.

<sup>2</sup>Requires OpenSSL 1.1.1 or later.

> <sup>3</sup>The supported hash algorithms are the same as the ones supported as standalone hash functions.

Reviewer 2: The structure of the start of this sentence could match "available" and "requires" better, for better flow:

```suggestion
<sup>3</sup>Supports only hash algorithms that are supported as standalone hash functions.
```

When it's repeated in other sections, a link might also be nice:

```suggestion
<sup>3</sup>Supports only hash algorithms that are [supported as standalone hash functions](#hash-and-message-authentication-algorithms).
```

## Symmetric encryption

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/aes](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/aes)
* [crypto/cipher](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/cipher)
* [crypto/des](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/des)
* [crypto/rc4](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rc4)

| Cipher + Mode | Windows  | Linux            |
|---------------|----------|------------------|
| AES-ECB       | ✔️       | ✔️              |
| AES-CBC       | ✔️       | ✔️              |
| AES-CTR       | ❌       | ✔️              |
| AES-CFB       | ❌       | ❌              |
| AES-OFB       | ❌       | ❌              |
| AES-GCM       | ✔️       | ✔️              |
| DES-CBC       | ✔️       | ⚠️<sup>1</sup>  |
| DES-ECB       | ✔️       | ⚠️<sup>1</sup>  |
| 3DES-ECB      | ✔️       | ✔️              |
| 3DES-CBC      | ✔️       | ✔️              |
| RC4           | ✔️       | ⚠️<sup>1</sup>  |

> <sup>1</sup>When using OpenSSL 3, requires the legacy provider to be enabled.

Reviewer 2: Might be worth explaining ✔️ vs. ⚠️ in a key/legend. Not sure why this deserves ⚠️ but "Available starting in Microsoft Go 1.24." is an ordinary ✔️ above.

Author: Done!

| PSS (SHA-3)                            | ❌                   | ❌                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (Unhashed)          | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (RIPMED160)         | ❌                   | ✔️<sup>2</sup>     |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (MD4)               | ❌                   | ✔️<sup>2</sup>     |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (MD5)               | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (MD5-SHA1)          | ✔️<sup>2</sup>       | ✔️<sup>2</sup>     |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (SHA-1)             | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (SHA-2)<sup>1</sup> | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (SHA-3)             | ❌                  | ❌                 |

<sup>1</sup>The supported hash algorithms are the same as the ones supported as standalone hash functions.

<sup>2</sup>Available starting in Microsoft Go 1.24.

#### RSA key sizes

[rsa.GenerateKey](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rsa#GenerateKey) only supports the following key sizes (in bits): 2048, 3072, 4096.

Multi-prime RSA keys are not supported.

> The RSA key size is subject to the limitations of the underlying cryptographic library. For example, on Windows and when using SCOSSL, the key size should be multiple of 8.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth being more exact? Are there more potential situations than this one example?

```suggestion
The RSA key size is subject to the limitations of the underlying cryptographic library:

* On Windows or when using SCOSSL, the key size must be a multiple of 8 (in bits).
```

But now I wonder if this was intended to be saying something about algorithms implemented by SCOSSL vs. by the built-in OpenSSL provider...

Author: I intentionally didn't want to enumerate a possible limitations, as can vary in time and are normally not part of the public documentation of the crypto libraries.

Reviewer 2: Ah, makes sense. I think the doc probably should state that variability pretty clearly, because otherwise it might be a bit confusing why more detail isn't provided. Also, it sounds like the user is meant to get a hint that they should avoid depending on exact details here.

Author: I've rephrased the paragraph to be less confusing.

#### PSS salt length

On Windows, when verifying a PSS signature, [rsa.PSSSaltLengthAuto](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rsa#pkg-constants) is not supported.

#### Random number generation

For those operations that require random numbers, only the [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader) is supported.

### ECDSA

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/ecdsa](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/ecdsa)
* [crypto/elliptic](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/elliptic)

| Elliptic Curve            | Windows     | Linux        |
|---------------------------|-------------|--------------|
| NIST P-224 (secp224r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-256 (secp256r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-384 (secp384r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-521 (secp521r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |

#### Random number generation

> For those operations that require random numbers, only the [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader) is supported.

Reviewer 2: This could probably be refined and more specific to Go:

```suggestion
Operations that require random numbers (rand io.Reader) only support [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader).
```

(A few repeats of this.)

| Ed25519ph   | ❌         | ❌           |

#### Random number generation

For those operations that require random numbers, only the [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader) is supported.

### DSA

| Parameters    | Windows     | Linux        |
|---------------|-------------|--------------|
| L1024N160     | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| L2048N224     | ❌          | ✔️          |
| L2048N256     | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| L3072N256     | ✔️          | ✔️          |

## KDF

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/hkdf](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/hkdf)
* [crypto/pbkdf2](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/pbkdf2)

| Functions     | Windows          | Linux             |
|---------------|------------------|-------------------|
| PBKDF2        | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  |
| HKDF          | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  |

<sup>1</sup>The supported hash algorithms are the same as the ones supported as standalone hash functions.

## ML-KEM

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/mlkem](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/mlkem)

| Parameters    | Windows     | Linux        |
|---------------|-------------|--------------|

> |768            | ❌          | ❌          |
> |1024           | ❌          | ❌          |

Reviewer 2: Formatting nit:

```suggestion
| 768           | ❌          | ❌          |
| 1024          | ❌          | ❌          |
```

# Cross-Platform Cryptography in Microsoft Go

Cryptographic operations in Microsoft Go are delegated to the operating system (OS) libraries in some conditions.

> Go apps will fall back to native Go implementations if the OS libraries don't support the algorithm.

Reviewer 2: Seeing this again, it feels a bit barer than it needs to be... I think a link and merging the paragraph helps make the context clearer. (A few more tweaks for flow, too.)

```suggestion
Cryptographic operations in Microsoft Go are delegated to the operating system (OS) libraries in some conditions described.
The high level conditions and the benefits of delegating cryptographic operations are described in the [Microsoft Go FIPS README](./Readme.md).
At a fine-grained level, Go apps will fall back to the native Go implementation of an algorithm if the OS libraries don't support it.
```

| OAEP (SHA-3)                           | ❌                   | ❌                 |
| PSS (MD5)                              | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PSS (SHA-1)                            | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PSS (SHA-2)<sup>1</sup>                | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PSS (SHA-3)                            | ❌                   | ❌                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (Unhashed)          | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (RIPMED160)         | ❌                   | ✔️<sup>2</sup>     |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (MD4)               | ❌                   | ✔️<sup>2</sup>     |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (MD5)               | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (MD5-SHA1)          | ✔️<sup>2</sup>       | ✔️<sup>2</sup>     |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (SHA-1)             | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (SHA-2)<sup>1</sup> | ✔️                   | ✔️                 |
| PKCS1v15 Signature (SHA-3)             | ❌                  | ❌                 |

> <sup>1</sup>The supported hash algorithms are the same as the ones supported as standalone hash functions.

Reviewer 2: Applying this suggestion to other places and adding in a link since it's in a different section.

```suggestion
<sup>1</sup>Supports only hash algorithms that are [supported as standalone hash functions](#hash-and-message-authentication-algorithms).
```

<sup>2</sup>Available starting in Microsoft Go 1.24.

#### RSA key sizes

[rsa.GenerateKey](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rsa#GenerateKey) only supports the following key sizes (in bits): 2048, 3072, 4096.

Multi-prime RSA keys are not supported.

The RSA key size is subject to the limitations of the underlying cryptographic library. For example, on Windows and when using SCOSSL, the key size should be multiple of 8.

#### PSS salt length

On Windows, when verifying a PSS signature, [rsa.PSSSaltLengthAuto](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rsa#pkg-constants) is not supported.

#### Random number generation

> For those operations that require random numbers, only the [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader) is supported.

Reviewer 2: (Applying this suggestion to more places.)

```suggestion
Operations that require random numbers (rand io.Reader) only support [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader).
```

* [crypto/ecdsa](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/ecdsa)
* [crypto/elliptic](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/elliptic)

| Elliptic Curve            | Windows     | Linux        |
|---------------------------|-------------|--------------|
| NIST P-224 (secp224r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-256 (secp256r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-384 (secp384r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-521 (secp521r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |

#### Random number generation

Operations that require random numbers (rand io.Reader) only support [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader).

### ECDH

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/ecdh](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/ecdsa)

| Elliptic Curve            | Windows     | Linux        |
|---------------------------|-------------|--------------|
| NIST P-224 (secp224r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-256 (secp256r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-384 (secp384r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| NIST P-521 (secp521r1)    | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| X25519 (curve25519)       | ❌          | ❌          |

#### Random number generation

> For those operations that require random numbers, only the [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader) is supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operations that require random numbers (rand io.Reader) only support [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader).
```

### Ed25519

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/ed25519](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/ed25519)

| Schemes     | Windows    | Linux         |
|-------------|------------|---------------|
| Ed25519     | ❌         | ✔️           |
| Ed25519ctx  | ❌         | ❌           |
| Ed25519ph   | ❌         | ❌           |

#### Random number generation

> For those operations that require random numbers, only the [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader) is supported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Operations that require random numbers (rand io.Reader) only support [rand.Reader](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/rand#Reader).
```

### DSA

| Parameters    | Windows     | Linux        |
|---------------|-------------|--------------|
| L1024N160     | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| L2048N224     | ❌          | ✔️          |
| L2048N256     | ✔️          | ✔️          |
| L3072N256     | ✔️          | ✔️          |

## KDF

This section includes the following packages:

* [crypto/hkdf](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/hkdf)
* [crypto/pbkdf2](https://pkg.go.dev/crypto/pbkdf2)

| Functions     | Windows          | Linux             |
|---------------|------------------|-------------------|
| PBKDF2        | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  |
| HKDF          | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  | ✔️ <sup>1</sup>  |

> <sup>1</sup>The supported hash algorithms are the same as the ones supported as standalone hash functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<sup>1</sup>Supports only hash algorithms that are [supported as standalone hash functions](#hash-and-message-authentication-algorithms).
```

### Windows

On Windows, Microsoft Go uses the [CNG library (Cryptography API: Next Generation)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/win32/seccng/cng-portal) for cryptographic operations.
CNG is available since Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008 and it doesn't require any additional installation nor configuration.

### Linux

On Linux, Microsoft Go uses the [OpenSSL crypto library](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/) for cryptographic operations.
OpenSSL is normally available on Linux distributions, but it may not be installed by default.
If it is not installed, you can install it using the package manager of your distribution.

OpenSSL 3 implements all the cryptographic algorithms using [Providers](https://docs.openssl.org/3.0/man7/crypto/#providers).
Microsoft Go officially supports the built-in providers and [SCOSSL (SymCrypt provider for OpenSSL)](https://github.com/microsoft/SymCrypt-OpenSSL) v1.6.1 or later.

> SCOSSL is expected to be used with the default built-in provider enable as a fallback (which is the case when using [Azure Linux 3](https://github.com/microsoft/AzureLinux)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SCOSSL is expected to be used with the default built-in provider enabled as a fallback (which is the case when using [Azure Linux 3](https://github.com/microsoft/AzureLinux)).
```

## Table legend

> The following table legend is used to indicate the level of support for each cryptographic algorithm:

Reviewer 2: For some reason it seems odd to say a table uses a legend--they both use the same symbols, but the tables don't really "use" the legend directly, to me.

```suggestion
The following legend describes the symbols used in the tables to indicate the level of support for each cryptographic algorithm:
```

| Symbol | Meaning                                                                                                            |
|--------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| ✔️     | Supported, possibly with minor limitations that don't require user action when using the latest Go and OS versions |

> | ⚠️     | Supported with limitations that require user action                                                                |

Reviewer 2: This is the only time the doc mentions "user", and I think without a title like "FIPS 140-2 User Guide", it might be misinterpreted to mean that the dev's program will require some input from their end users. (Which doesn't make sense vs. a correct interpretation, but seems worth clarifying.)

Maybe the right fix is to actually update the intro to mention that this is a user guide for cryptography in Microsoft Go, to make "user" contextualized throughout the whole doc. (So maybe this can wait until this doc fully takes the place of the user guide.)

Author: Good point. I've replaces `user action` for `special configuration`, which is more specific.

| ❌     | Not supported                                                                                                      |

> When an algorithm is not supported or the limitations are not met, Microsoft Go will fall back to the Go implementation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When an algorithm is not supported or the limitations are exceeded, Microsoft Go will fall back to the Go implementation.
```
